Add post Linking metrics and traces with Exemplars (#45)
lunatech-labs/lunatech-blog: posts/2022-01-21-linking-metrics-and-traces-with-exemplars.adoc

= Linking metrics and traces with Exemplars
LeonorLunatech
v1.0, 2022-01-21
:title: Linking metrics and traces with Exemplars
:imagesdir: ../media/2022-01-21-linking-metrics-and-traces-with-exemplars
:lang: en
:tags: [grafana, prometheus, exemplars, scala]

What if you could easily link a metric with a trace? And what if I told you that you can do it visually?
Meet Exemplars. They are displayed as diamonds in the graph shown above.

> By the end of this blog post you will be able to setup a complete docker-compose with Grafana, Tempo, Prometheus and a simple application that produces metrics and traces and links them with exemplars.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end of this blog post you will be able to set up a complete docker-compose with Grafana, Tempo, Prometheus and a simple application that produces metrics and traces and links them with exemplars.
```

setup -> noun or adjective
set up -> verb

== What are Exemplars
But what are exemplars, exactly? Exemplars are a concept from https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#exemplars[Prometheus]

> "Exemplars are references to data outside of the MetricSet. A common use case are IDs of program traces."

Reviewer: I'd recommend using quote syntax for this https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/blocks/blockquotes/#basic-quote-syntax, it might display nicer.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Grafana graphs supports Prometheus exemplars. They are displayed as diamonds in the graph visualization. A mouse hoovering, over the diamond, triggers a popup with details about the trace which, in turn, displays a button `Query  with tempo` that will take you to the corresponding trace visualization in Grafana Tempo.

Author: I guess this sentence needs simplification... too many `which`, no?

> Grafana graphs supports Prometheus exemplars. They are displayed as diamonds in the graph visualization. A mouse hoovering, over the diamond, triggers a popup with details about the trace which, in turn, displays a button `Query  with tempo` that will take you to the corresponding trace visualization in Grafana Tempo.

Reviewer 2: Yes, sure... could be 

`Grafana graphs support Prometheus exemplars. They are displayed as diamonds in the graph visualization. A mouse hovering over the diamond triggers a popup showing details about the trace along with a `Query  with tempo` button which, when clicked, takes you to the corresponding trace visualization in Grafana Tempo.`

> Grafana graphs supports Prometheus exemplars. They are displayed as diamonds in the graph visualization. A mouse hoovering, over the diamond, triggers a popup with details about the trace which, in turn, displays a button `Query  with tempo` that will take you to the corresponding trace visualization in Grafana Tempo.

Author: That's good! Thank you so much

> Grafana graphs support Prometheus exemplars. They are displayed as diamonds in the graph visualization. A mouse hovering, over the diamond, triggers a popup with details about the trace which, in turn, displays a button `Query  with tempo` which, when clicked, takes you to the corresponding trace visualization in Grafana Tempo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grafana graphs support Prometheus exemplars. They are displayed as diamonds in the graph visualization. A mouse hovering over the diamond triggers a popup with details about the trace which, in turn, displays a button `Query with tempo` which, when clicked, takes you to the corresponding trace visualization in Grafana Tempo.
```

Author: I realised I forgot to push one modification 🤦  This sentence was already improved

[source,scala]
----
Behaviors.receive { (context, message) =>
  message match {
    case MakeCandy =>
      val span: Span = CandyMetrics.createSpan(tracer, "Making candy")
      val metric = CandyMetrics.ProductionCandyDurationHistogram.startTimer()

      makeCandy(context)

      span.end
      metric.observeDurationWithExemplar("TraceID", span.getSpanContext.getTraceId)
      Behaviors.same
  }
}
----

The metric and the trace are linked with the `observeDurationWithExemplar` method.

Besides the id of the trace the tag `TraceID` is necessary. This `TraceID` tag will appear later in our configuration.

For the metric we are using Prometheus metrics. We need to register the metrics beforehand:

[source,scala]
----
  final val ProductionCandyDurationHistogram: Histogram =
    Histogram
      .build()
      .namespace("lunatech")
      .subsystem("factory")
      .name("production_candy_duration")
      .help("Amount of time it takes to make one candy")
      .withExemplars()
      .register()
----
Prometheus supports exemplars for histograms and counter metrics.

> For the tracing we are using OpenTelemetry. Here this is the code to start a single span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the tracing we are using OpenTelemetry. Here is the code to start a single span.
```

The complete setup can be found in https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-traces-metrics-exemplars/tree/master/docker[the docker folder]. I will only point out a few important details needed to bring Examplars together.

==== Prometheus
The following command has to be passed in the docker setup
[source,text]
----
--enable-feature=exemplar-storage
----

==== Grafana
Note the use of the `TraceID` tag in the setup of the https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-traces-metrics-exemplars/blob/master/docker/grafana/provisioning/datasources/datasource.yml[datasource] from Prometheus (also used in the source code):
[source,text]
----
 exemplarTraceIdDestinations:
   - name: TraceID
     datasourceUid: tempo
----

=== Link docker instances with the candy factory
Now that we have setup Prometheus in port 13798, we can start an HTTPServer that exports metrics.
[source,scala]
----
val prometheusPort = 13798
  new HTTPServer(prometheusPort)
  DefaultExports.initialize()
----

And finally, we need to also send the traces to the otel-collector:
[source,scala]
----
 val collectorEndpoint = "http://otel-collector:4317"
  val tracer: Tracer = Tracing.getTracer(collectorEndpoint)
----

> We are still missing the code to instantiate the Tracer. For the sake of reducing the amount of code dumping check here the https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-traces-metrics-exemplars/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/exemplars/observability/Tracing.scala[object Tracing].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are still missing the code to instantiate the Tracer. For the sake of reducing the amount of code dumping, take a look at the https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-traces-metrics-exemplars/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/exemplars/observability/Tracing.scala[Tracing object here].
```

=== Grafana dashboard

> In order to run the docker-compose don't forget to first create the `lunatech-traces-metrics-exemplars` image with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to run docker-compose don't forget to first create the `lunatech-traces-metrics-exemplars` image with:
```

[source,text]
----
$ sbt docker
----

> Now we are ready to launch the docker-compose:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we are ready to launch docker-compose:
```

[source,text]
----
$ docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml up
----

In the browser Grafana will be available at `localhost:3000`. There's a dashboard already available. If you hoover over the little diamonds you will see the exemplar's data details:

.Dashboard with details of one exemplar
image::dashboard_w_exemplar.png[Exemplar, width = 800]

> Clicking on `Query with tempo` will take you to the correspondent trace in Tempo:

Author: ups!

.Trace in Tempo
image::tempo_trace.png[Exemplar, width = 800]

=== Summary

> In this post I have walked you through the steps needed to produce and visualize metrics and traces linked by Exemplars, in a docker-compose setup.

Reviewer: Maybe adding another sentence here would be nice? Something as simple as "I hope this helps you in your future metrics setups!" or something like that?

Author: What about adding `I hope this post has helped you to increase the observability of your systems.`
